大家好！
Good evening everyone!

我是刘家琨，来自四川成都。四川地处中国西部内陆的盆地，紧邻青藏高原，出产熊猫、麻辣美食、以及休闲和包容。
I'm Liu Jiakun, from Chengdu, Sichuan Province. The Sichuan basin is in south-western China, adjacent to the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. It is famous for giant pandas, spicy delicacies, as well as laid-back attitude and inclusive culture.

感谢评审团！你们的认同对我来说是极大的鼓励。我凭直觉做的工作经过你们的概括变得清晰，你们的评语宛如知音。
Thank you, the Jury! Your recognition is a great encouragement to me. The work I did intuitively has become clearer after your summarization. Your comments resonate with my heart, to be long cherished.

感谢普利兹克家族——辛迪，我相信你能听见——谢谢你们对建筑学的热爱、恒心和慷慨。我记住了汤姆·普利兹克先生的评语，"哲学地超越表面"，我会牢记，我还想超越更多。
Thank you, the Pritzker family! Cindy, I believe you can receive my gratitude! Thank you for your love, perseverance, and generosity towards architecture. I have memorized Mr. Tom Pritzker's comment, "philosophically looking beyond the surface." I will keep it in mind, and I will also keep looking beyond even more.

感谢我的业主们，没有你们的信任、支持甚至冒险，好多建筑都不可能实现。
Thank you, my clients. Without your trust, support, and willingness to take risks, many of the buildings would not have been possible.

感谢我的同事们，我们一起紧张赶图。"这件事不急，但一定要快"，这类话以后会说得更多。
Thank you, my colleagues. Together we've been working so hard on so many drawings. I promise you, sentences like "This is not urgent, but it must be done quickly" will probably be said more often in the future.

感谢我的朋友们，你们使我在日常生活中扎根，我从你们那里汲取了很多营养。
Thank you, my friends. You make me take root in daily life. I have drawn a lot of inspiration from you.

感谢我的家人们，你们是我的后盾。特别感谢马丁·刘，这段时间你辛苦了，愿你今后写出好音乐，"音乐是流动的建筑"。
Thank you, my family, you are the foundation of my life. I especially want to thank Martin Liu, you have been working intensively during this period. I hope you will compose great music in the future, as the saying goes, "music is fluid architecture."

感谢工作室的三只猫，"撸猫爽"，肉身不可替代。
Thank you, the three cats in our studio. "Petting cats is chill," the tactile experience is irreplaceable.

感谢曼尼努拉女士和丹妮拉女士！你们是送喜报的人。你们给我打电话的时候我正在头痛，当我放下电话后，我发现我的头已经不痛了！
Thank you Ms. Manuela and Ms. Daniella! You are the ones who brought the good news. I was just having a headache when you called, after I put down the phone, the pain was gone!

建筑奖对建筑师有着明显的疗愈作用，建筑物也应该对使用者有着相同的作用，我认为。建筑学能不能？
Architectural awards obviously have a magical healing effect on architects, buildings should have the same effect on their users, I suppose. What can architecture achieve?

衡量一项事业是否重要，可以看它使用的材料：政治以国家的命运为材料，经济以财富的流通为材料，还有文化、艺术、科技、宗教……
To measure the importance of a cause, we can look at the materials it uses: politics takes the fate of a nation as its material, economy takes the circulation of wealth as its material; we can also look at cultures, arts, science and technology, religions…

那么建筑学呢？建筑学以砖石土木为材料——这么一说似乎有点不妙，这些都是物质——但是，物质产生于世界之初，比以上的一切都要古老。地球上所有的物质几乎都被有机生物浸润过了，万物有灵。建筑学以物质为材料，把以上的一切都固化下来并呈现于世。当建筑完成以后，建筑就不再是什么的隐喻，建筑直接就是，成了存在本身。建筑学就是操作物质，直到把物质操作得沁出精神。建筑学无中生有，参与造物，而造物本来是属于神的事情。
And for architecture? Architecture uses bricks, stones, earth and wood as its materials. At first glance, this may seem not so promising, as these are all physical substances. However, matter came into being at the beginning of this world and is older than all the things mentioned above. Almost all the substances on the earth have been touched by organic creatures. Everything has a spirit. Architecture uses matter as its material to solidify and represent all of the above. Once a building is completed, it is no longer a metaphor, it is Being, an ontological existence. Architecture is about manipulating matter until the spirit emerges from it. Architecture builds something out of nothing, participating in creation, which is originally the work of gods.

建筑学很复杂：综合思考，简明呈现；依赖数据，定于直觉。建筑学是"非语言"的，不是那么好计算——AI也可以顺便听一下。
Architecture is complicated: it requires comprehensive thinking and concise presentation; it relies on data but is ultimately determined by intuition. Architecture is "non-verbal," not so easy to calculate, and I think AI should listen to this.

"与自然共生"是中华文明的古老智慧。对蚁巢来说草原是自然，对村民来说蚁巢和草原是自然，对城市来说村落、蚁巢和草原是自然……城市是人类为自己建的"蚁巢"，不一定非要和自然对立。"自然"和"建造"是矛盾与平衡的关系，事在人为。
"Living in harmony with nature" is an ancient wisdom of Chinese civilization. For an ant nest, the grassland is nature, for a villager, both the ant nest and the grassland are nature. For a city, the village, the ant nest, and the grassland are all nature… A city is an "ant nest" built by humans and doesn't necessarily have to be in opposition to nature. "Nature" and "construction" have a relationship of both contradiction and balance, and it all depends on our effort.

每一个地方都是本地人的本地。如果地方没有深度，所谓国际也是浮云。无论在哪里，建筑总要落在一个具体的地方，"因地制宜"是可以用于不同地方的方法论。
Every place is a local place for the locals. If the local has no depth, the global is just a fleeting cloud. Wherever it is, a building has to be precisely located, therefore "adapting to locality" can be a methodology applied to different places.

传统凝聚着一个族群的精神幻象和自我认同。传统的内核并不是过往的样式，而是延续至今的世界观。我们生活在当下。
Tradition embodies the spiritual fantasy and self-identification of an ethnic or cultural group. The core of tradition is not the inherited models, but the worldview that has been passed down to this day. After all, we live in the present.

乌托邦和人间烟火是跷跷板的两头。革命容易分寸难。
Utopia and mundane life are like the two ends of a seesaw. Revolution is easy, balancing is difficult.

"砖想成为什么？"我们也可以像路易·康问砖那样去问问项目想成为什么。关注对象，本质赋形。摒弃小我，有可能调动更大的力量。在秩序中包容他者可以形成和声。
"What do you want, brick?" Just as Louis Kahn asked the brick, we can also ask a project, what do you want? Focus on the object and give form according to its essence. Let go of the ego, then it will be possible of mobilizing greater forces. Embracing the other within the order can create a harmonious symphony.

风格是双刃剑，既有利于被人识别，也容易自我限制，而统一的方法论可以使不同面貌的作品有共同的气质。可识别性应该是通过系列作品传达的艺术个性。
Style is a double-edged sword. It is beneficial for being recognized, it can also become limitation. But a unified methodology can endow works with different appearances with a common temperament, recognizability should be the artistic individuality conveyed through a series of works.

建筑最动人之处是大象般的笨拙与敏感。精致只是无数标准中的一种。通向完美无瑕的道路也通向非人。"未完成感"不是"未完工"，而是对生长的诱导。材料和工法无所谓新旧，但看用在什么地方。粗砺可以挂住时间。建筑学需要在新益求新中守护原始的感悟力。
The most touching aspect of architecture is its clumsiness and sensitivity, like that of an elephant. Refinement is just one of countless standards, the road to perfection might also lead to the inhumane. The "sense of incompleteness" is not the same as "unfinished construction," but an inducement for growth. Materials and methods are neither new nor old in themselves, it all depends on where they are used. Rusticity preserves the passing of time. Architecture needs to safeguard its primal instinct while constantly seeking newness.

我们热爱的工作会被取代吗？不会的。建筑学和人类的命运紧紧缠绕在一起，人类不灭亡，建筑学也不会灭亡。建筑学会演化，会更新，建筑学一直在这样做。
Will the work we love so deeply be replaced? I think not. Architecture is closely intertwined with the fate of humanity, it will evolve and renew itself, as it has always been doing. As long as humanity does not perish, architecture will not either.

有些失眠之夜，我会想到，能够投身建筑学真的是我的幸运，而我差一点就放弃了建筑学。当我想的是建筑学能给我带来什么时，它的确也会有所回报；而当我想的是我能给建筑学带来什么时，我才真正得到了更多，有时候，甚至战胜了虚无。
On some sleepless nights, I would suddenly realize how lucky I was to be involved in architecture, and how close I was to give it up. When I questioned what architecture can provide, it indeed has brought me some return. When I asked what I could give to architecture, then I have gained much more, sometimes, it even helped me to overcome Nothingness.

建筑学在上。谢谢建筑学！
Architecture is supreme. Thank you, architecture!
